√×
√1.How can information systems prevent data loss or restore lost data?
√2.What is data loss?
√3.How is data loss distinguished from data unavailability?
√4.What is the definition of regular data backups?
×5.What can the frequency of data loss and the impact be greatly mitigated?
×6.What are sometimes called ‘hard science’?
×7.How many main branches can natural science be divided into?
×8.Whose controversial falsifiability criterion helps differentiate scientific endeavors?
×9.When did biology became a unified science?
×10.What is often called ‘the central science’ ?
×11.Why is physics regarded as the fundamental science?
×12.What is the scope of veterinary medicine?
×13.Who is the first Buddhist Emperor of India?
×14.When did farriers combined their work in horseshoeing with 'horse doctoring'?
×15.What is the name of the first comprehensive treatise on the anatomy of a nonhuman species?
×16.What is the computer science study of?
×17.When did Gottfried Leibniz demonstrate a digital mechanical calculator?
×18.Who launched the mechanical calculator industry in 1820?
×19.When did computer science began to be established as a distinct academic discipline?
×20.What branch is synthetic biology from?
×21.Who portrayed synthetic biology as a new emerging scientific field where ICT?
×22.What is the purpose of synthetic biology?
×23.When did George M. Church encoded one of his books about synthetic biology in DNA?
×24.How many times were able to exchange the bacteria in the culture media? 
×25.What may be regarded as a branch of both psychology and musicology?
×26.Whose establishment of the simple string length ratios that formed the consonances of the octave?
×27.When has music psychology expanded to cover a wide array of theoretical and applied areas?
×28.What is the abbreviation of functional magnetic resonance imaging?
×29.How did researchers estimate the occurrence of AP to be?
×30.Who speculated that music may have held an adaptive advantage and functioned as a protolanguage?
