Orientation columns are organized regions of neurons that are excited by visual line stimuli of varying angles. These columns are located in the primary visual cortex (V1) and span multiple cortical layers. The geometry of the orientation columns are arranged in slabs that are perpendicular to the surface of the primary visual cortex.
In 1958, David Hubel and Torsten Wiesel discovered cells in the visual cortex that had orientation selectivity. This was found through an experiment by giving a cat specific visual stimuli and measuring the corresponding excitation of the neurons in striate cortex (V1). The experimental set up was of a slide projector, a cat, electrodes, and an electrode monitor. They discovered this orientation selectivity when changing slides on the projector. The act of changing the slides produced a faint shadow line across the projector, and excited the neuron they were measuring. At the time of this experiment it was not conclusive that these orientation selective cells were in a "columnar" structure but the possibility of this structure was considered by research conducted by Vernon Mountcastle in 1956 about the topographic properties of the somatosensory system. [3] [4] [5]

In 1974 Hubel and Wiesel wrote a paper about the geometry of orientation columns. They recorded 1410 cells in 45 penetrations into the striate cortex. Through this 1-dimensional technique they conceptualized that the orientation columns are not columns but slabs.[1] In 1985, Gary Blasdel discovered a technique to visualize these orientation columns in 2D. His technique used photodiodes to detect optical changes in the visual cortex with the metabolic marker, 2-deoxyglucose, which labels active neurons. This confirmed Hubel and Wiesel's studies and also brought to light the swirls and pinwheel formations in the striate cortex. [4] [6]

Hubel and Wiesel received the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 1981 for their contributions to the development of the visual system.
Orientation columns are located in the primary visual cortex also known as the striate cortex. These orientation columns are not cylindrical in shape as the word column implies but are flat slabs that are parallel to each other. The slabs are perpendicular to the surface of the visual cortex and are lined up similar to slices of bread. These neurons are highly discriminatory for visual orientations and their motion. [1] [7]

Most of the cells in orientation columns are complex cells. Complex cells will respond to a properly orientated line in any location of the receptive field, whereas simple cells have a narrower receptive field where a properly oriented line will excite it. Simple cells have distinct subdivisions of excitatory and inhibitory regions. It is proposed that complex cells receive input from many simple cells, which explains why the complex cells have a slightly wider receptive field. [8] [9]

There are possible biological advantages to the highly ordered structures of orientation columns. The first possible advantage is that orientation selectivity may be intensified with lateral inhibition from neighboring cells of a slightly different preferred orientation. This would provide an efficient system for wiring between the striate cortex and the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN).[10] The second possible advantage is the ordered structure aids in development, by guaranteeing all orientations are represented throughout the visual field with minimal redundancy and no deficiencies. The third possible advantage is that if columns with similar orientation selectivity are close together, fewer afferents from the LGN are needed. This allows for efficient wiring. So by removing a few LGN inputs and adding a few, the orientation selectivity can be changed marginally.[1]

Ocular dominance columns are also found in the striate cortex. These columns were found to prefer crossing iso-orientation lines perpendicularly. During microelectrode experiments, it is normal to see penetrations where eye dominance changes between the contralateral eye and ipsilateral eye but this does not interrupt the orientation sequence.
Recently, studies involving human models were conducted with high-field fMRI. These studies demonstrated the existence of orientation preference in humans and showed similarities to the studies conducted with monkey models. It was found in these models that there was an over-representation of the 90° orientation preference. This corresponds to a bias towards processing vertical visual stimuli with horizontal movement. This bears resemblance to the oblique effect where there is a deficiency in perception to oblique contours (45° and 90°).
Using 2D optical techniques, pinwheel formations (also known as whorls) of orientation columns were discovered. Pinwheels are the location where multiple orientation columns converge. Orientation columns are organized radially around a point known as a singularity. The arrangement, around the singularity, can be observed to be in both a counter-clockwise or clockwise fashion.[11] It is suggested that an artifact of the optical recordings may cause these singularities. Limitations in the resolution of the optical technique may be to explain for these singularities.
