The Bernstein Network (official name: National Bernstein Network Computational Neuroscience (NNCN)) is a German research network, which started in 2004 as a funding initiative of the Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF). The aim of the initiative was the long-term establishment of the research discipline Computational Neuroscience in Germany.[1] As part of the high-tech strategy of the German government, the Bernstein Network has been supported with a total of about 170 million euros until now. The network includes over 200 research groups at more than 25 locations nationwide. The participating research groups are located at universities and non-university research institutes (Fraunhofer, Helmholtz, Leibniz and Max Planck institutes). Using a BMBF initial financing, 22 new professorships in the area of Computational Neuroscience have been established at German universities within the framework of the Bernstein Network, which are continued permanently by the federal states.

Scientific members of the network are involved in study programs and courses.

In collaboration with more than twenty industry partners, scientific members of the Bernstein network (further) develop specific biomedical or technological applications (e.g. brain computer interface, retinal implant, cochlear implant, prosthesis, advanced driver-assistance systems, neuromorphic chips). Also, they explore new diagnostic methods, therapeutic approaches, or tools for neurological or psychiatric disorders in collaboration with clinical researchers (e.g. epilepsy, tinnitus, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, stroke, depression, schizophrenia).

Namesake for the network was the German physiologist Julius Bernstein (1839-1917). His "membrane hypothesis" provided the first biophysical explanation of how nerve cells transmit and process information via electrical currents. Generating a mathematical description, he also paved the way to simulate neural brain processes in the computer. 

Six Bernstein Centers (in Berlin, Freiburg, Göttingen, Heidelberg-Mannheim, Munich and Tübingen) form the basic structure of the Bernstein Network.[4] As additional local structural elements, five Bernstein groups have been established (in Bochum, Bremen, Heidelberg, Jena, and Magdeburg).[5] Eleven Bernstein Collaborations link the Bernstein Centers with diverse research groups widely distributed over Germany.[6] Since 2006, the BMBF has annually allocated the Bernstein Award to an outstanding young scientist in the research field of Computational Neuroscience.[7] The award is endowed with up to 1,25 million euros over five years, and allows to establish an independent junior research group at a German research institution.

Since 2008 and 2009, respectively, the Bernstein Network comprehends two research foci, which explore the first steps towards applications. The Bernstein Focus: Neurotechnology includes 4 local collaborative projects (in Berlin, Göttingen, Frankfurt and Freiburg-Tübingen);[8] the Bernstein Focus: Neuronal Basis of Learning comprises eight collaborative projects.

The German INCF Node (G-Node) connects the Bernstein Network with the international network of the International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility.

Since 2010, the BMBF promotes German-American cooperation projects in the field of computational neuroscience within the framework of the Bernstein Network and the CRCNS program in cooperation with the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the National Institutes of Health (NIH).[10][11] In a cooperation between the BMBF, German Research Foundation (DFG), and the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), German-Japan Collaboration projects have been launched in 2012.

Since 2005, members of the Bernstein Network organize the annual Bernstein Conference (until 2008: "Bernstein Symposium") at different locations of the network.

In 2009, members of the Bernstein Network have funded a non-profit association, the Bernstein Association Computational Neuroscience, which aims at promoting science, research, and teaching in Computational Neuroscience and the communication of research contents and results to the public. Since March 2014, anyone who is scientifically active in the field of Computational Neuroscience or related subjects may become a member. 

