The International Neuromodulation Society (INS) is a non-profit group of clinicians, scientists and engineers dedicated to the scientific development and awareness of neuromodulation[1] – the alteration of nerve activity through the delivery of electromagnetic stimulation or chemical agents to targeted sites of the body. Neuromodulation is a burgeoning field – analysts predicted a 27 percent annual growth rate through 2012.[2] Founded in 1989 and based in San Francisco, CA, the INS educates and promotes the field through meetings, its bimonthly, peer-reviewed journal Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural Interface and chapter websites.

Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural Interface is the official publication of the INS. The peer-reviewed journal aims to advance the basic and clinical science of the field of neuromodulation. Published 8 times per year, the journal is MEDLINE-indexed. 

In 1989, after the first International Congress on Epidural Spinal Cord Stimulation was held in the Netherlands, a group of physicians founded the INS in Paris, France. Their incentive was to bridge the gap between neurologists, neurosurgeons, vascular surgeons and cardiologists to build a multidisciplinary and international society dedicated to the advancement of neuromodulation. 

The International Neuromodulation Society now represents a professional association of more than 1700 members worldwide and has a presence in 33 countries around the globe. The INS was named the 2007 Most Valuable Nonprofit Society by Neurotech Reports and was awarded the Golden Electrode Award at the 2007 Neurotech Leaders Forum.

INS members actively work to inform peers and patients about this new class of therapies through organizational collaboration, articles, professional presentations, and web content.

The 14th World Congress of the INS will be held in Sydney, Australia in 2019. 

The official journal of the International Neuromodulation Society is Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural Interface. This journal is the preeminent journal in the area of neuromodulation, providing its readership with state of the art clinical, translational and basic science research in the field as well as representing the needs of the neuromodulation community. 


