
√1.What is the abbreviation of Artificial intelligence ? 

√2.What does the field of AI research defines itself as ? 

×3.What led directly to Alan Turing 's theory of computation ? 

√4.When was research in the U.S. heavily funded by the Department of Defense ? 

√5.Who agreed that ` within a generation ... the problem of creating ` artificial intelligence ' will substantially be solved ' ? 

×6.How much the market for AI had reached by 1985 ? 

×7.What is the abbreviation of Natural language processing ? 

×8.What is Alan Turing published an article titled ? 

×9.How many Russian sentences the Georgetown experiment involved fully automatic translation of into English ? 

√10.What were some notably successful NLP systems developed in the 1960s ? 

×11.What is the computational meaning of individual words in context ? 

×12.What is the abbreviation of Artificial neural networks ? 

√13.When did Artificial intelligence shifted from high-level to low-level ? 

×14.Who described the use of connectionism to simulate neural processes ? 

×15.How many types of parameters is an ANN typically defined by ? 

√16.What is a knowledge base ? 

√17.What is the definition of a knowledge base ?

×18.Which were the first knowledge-based systems ? 

×19.When did all large Management Information Systems stored their data in some type of hierarchical or relational database ? 

√20.What was the next evolution for the term knowledge-base ? 

×21.What is meaning of ` fabric , structure ' ? 

×22.What is a simple machine that transforms lateral force and movement of the tool into a transverse splitting force and movement of the workpiece ? 

×23.Who studied the Archimedean simple machines ? 

×24.How many mechanisms does Heron of Alexandria in his work Mechanics lists ? 

√25.What led Archimedes to define the lever , pulley and screw as simple machines ? 

×26.What is the overall goal of the data mining process ? 

×27.What is the short for ` knowledge discovery in databases ' ? 

√28.Who sponsor the First International Conference on Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery -LRB- KDD-95 -RRB- that was started in Montreal ? 

√29.What is the primary research journal of the field ? 

×30.What are early methods of identifying patterns in data ? 

