A knowledge-based system (KBS) is a computer program that reasons and uses a knowledge base to solve complex problems. A more specific definition of the domain restricts it to expert systems (ES) (frequently called knowledge-based systems). Although the terms sound very general, actually they have acquired a very technical, restricted meaning of referring to narrow set of computer systems fulfilling quite rigid conditions. Such a definition is not representative of cornucopia of knowledge intensive applications and technologies flooding the digital world. A more general view regards KBS as an area of engineering dealing with digitizing knowledge and building knowledge intensive systems in general, beyond more conservative ES. The more general view extends and generalizes the definition of knowledge-based systems.

The term is broad and is used to refer to many different kinds of systems; the one common theme that unites all knowledge based systems is an attempt to represent knowledge explicitly via tools such as ontologies and rules rather than implicitly via code the way a conventional computer program does. A knowledge based system has three types of sub-systems: a knowledge base, a user interface and an inference engine. The knowledge base represents facts about the world, often in some form of subsumption ontology. The inference engine represents logical assertions and conditions about the world, usually represented via IF-THEN rules.

Knowledge-based systems were first developed by artificial intelligence researchers. These early knowledge-based systems were primarily expert systems – in fact, the term was often used anonymously with expert systems. The difference is in the view taken to describe the system: "expert system" refers to the type of task the system is trying to assist with – to replace or aid a human expert in a complex task; "knowledge-based system" refers to the architecture of the system – that it represents knowledge explicitly (rather than as procedural code). While the earliest knowledge-based systems were almost all expert systems, the same tools and architectures can and have since been used for a whole host of other types of systems – i.e., virtually all expert systems are knowledge-based systems, but many knowledge-based systems are not expert systems.

The first knowledge-based systems were rule based expert systems. One of the most famous was Mycin a program for medical diagnosis. These early expert systems represented facts about the world as simple assertions in a flat database and used rules to reason about and as a result add to these assertions. 

As knowledge-based systems became more complex the techniques used to represent the knowledge base became more sophisticated. Rather than representing facts as assertions about data, the knowledge-base became more structured, representing information using similar techniques to object-oriented programming such as hierarchies of classes and subclasses, relations between classes, and behavior of objects. As the knowledge base became more structured reasoning could occur both by independent rules and by interactions within the knowledge base itself. For example, procedures stored as demons on objects could fire and could replicate the chaining behavior of rules. 

Another advancement was the development of special purpose automated reasoning systems called classifiers. Rather than statically declare the subsumption relations in a knowledge-base a classifier allows the developer to simply declare facts about the world and let the classifier deduce the relations. In this way a classifier also can play the role of an inference engine. 

The most recent advancement of knowledge-based systems has been to adopt the technologies for the development of systems that use the internet. The internet often has to deal with complex, unstructured data that can't be relied on to fit a specific data model. The technology of knowledge-based systems and especially the ability to classify objects on demand is ideal for such systems. The model for these kinds of knowledge-based Internet systems is known as the Semantic Web.