Affective computing (sometimes called artificial emotional intelligence, or emotion AI)[1] is the study and development of systems and devices that can recognize, interpret, process, and simulate human affects. It is an interdisciplinary field spanning computer science, psychology, and cognitive science.[2] While the origins of the field may be traced as far back as to early philosophical inquiries into emotion,[3] the more modern branch of computer science originated with Rosalind Picard's 1995 paper[4] on affective computing.[5][6] A motivation for the research is the ability to simulate empathy. The machine should interpret the emotional state of humans and adapt its behavior to them, giving an appropriate response to those emotions.
The difference between sentiment analysis and affective analysis is that the latter detects the different emotions instead of identifying only the polarity of the phrase.
Detecting emotional information begins with passive sensors which capture data about the user's physical state or behavior without interpreting the input. The data gathered is analogous to the cues humans use to perceive emotions in others. For example, a video camera might capture facial expressions, body posture, and gestures, while a microphone might capture speech. Other sensors detect emotional cues by directly measuring physiological data, such as skin temperature and galvanic resistance.[7]
Recognizing emotional information requires the extraction of meaningful patterns from the gathered data. This is done using machine learning techniques that process different modalities, such as speech recognition, natural language processing, or facial expression detection, and produce either a labels (i.e. 'confused') or coordinates in a valence-arousal space.
Another area within affective computing is the design of computational devices proposed to exhibit either innate emotional capabilities or that are capable of convincingly simulating emotions. A more practical approach, based on current technological capabilities, is the simulation of emotions in conversational agents in order to enrich and facilitate interactivity between human and machine.[8] While human emotions are often associated with surges in hormones and other neuropeptides, emotions in machines might be associated with abstract states associated with progress (or lack of progress) in autonomous learning systems[citation needed]. In this view, affective emotional states correspond to time-derivatives (perturbations) in the learning curve of an arbitrary learning system.[citation needed]

Marvin Minsky, one of the pioneering computer scientists in artificial intelligence, relates emotions to the broader issues of machine intelligence stating in The Emotion Machine that emotion is "not especially different from the processes that we call 'thinking.'"
In cognitive science and neuroscience, there have been two leading models describing how humans perceive and classify emotion: the continuous model and the categorical model. The continuous model defines each facial expression of emotion as a feature vector in a face space. This model explains, for example, how expressions of emotion can be seen at different intensities. In contrast, the categorical model consists of C classifiers, each tuned to a specific emotion category. This model explains, among other findings, why the images in a morphing sequence between a happy and a surprise face are perceived as either happy or surprise but not something in between.

These approaches have one major flaw in common: they can only detect one emotion from an image, this is generally done by a winner takes it all method. Yet, every day we can perceive more than one emotional category from a single image. Both the categorical and continuous model are unable to identify multiple emotions, so a new way to model it is to consider new categories as the overlap of a small set of categories. A detailed study related to this topic is given in "A model of the perception of facial expressions of emotion by humans: research overview and perspectives".[10]

The following sections consider the possible features which can be used for the task of emotion recognition.
Various changes in the autonomic nervous system can indirectly alter a person's speech, and affective technologies can leverage this information to recognize emotion. For example, speech produced in a state of fear, anger, or joy becomes fast, loud, and precisely enunciated, with a higher and wider range in pitch, whereas emotions such as tiredness, boredom, or sadness tend to generate slow, low-pitched, and slurred speech.[11] Some emotions have been found to be more easily computationally identified, such as anger[12] or approval.[13]

Emotional speech processing technologies recognize the user's emotional state using computational analysis of speech features. Vocal parameters and prosodic features such as pitch variables and speech rate can be analyzed through pattern recognition techniques.[12][14]

Speech analysis is an effective method of identifying affective state, having an average reported accuracy of 70 to 80% in recent research.[15][16] These systems tend to outperform average human accuracy (approximately 60%[12]) but are less accurate than systems which employ other modalities for emotion detection, such as physiological states or facial expressions.[17] However, since many speech characteristics are independent of semantics or culture, this technique is considered to be a promising route for further research.
