Vihangam Yoga is an ancient meditation technique practiced by Indian seers and sages. In the current time, it is established by Sadguru Sadafaldeo Ji Maharaj. Vihangam Yoga is also known as Brahmavidya, Madhu-vidya, Para Vidhya in the Indian ancient most scriptures and Vedas. "Vihangam" literally means "bird". Just as a bird leaves its base on the earth to fly high in the sky, so does Vihangam Yoga enable the human Soul (Atma) to cut off its moorings in the Prakriti (phenomenal world) and realize its true and free nature .[according to whom?] This knowledge is emerged from Brahma so it is also named as Brahma Vidya and who ever has gained this knowledge by practising it called Brahma Rishi. Through the Vihangam Yoga meditation, one easily raises his soul's energy to open "Kundalini shakti" (the hidden Potential in all of us) under the able guidance of a true Sadguru and attains Soul's conscious state, from where it actually starts the prayer to "Supreme Soul". This is a situation where the soul is in its own state i.e. it is not attached with Mann (Mind) and Prana – the true form.
Vihangam means a bird. As a bird floats in the air overcoming the gravitational force of the earth, so does the consciousness of the Atma float in the limitless space of pure consciousness leaving behind its physical base i.e. body, mind and intellect. To distinguish it from various prevalent physical, mental and spiritual practices, which also go by the name of Yoga, the Vedic Yoga is called Vihangam Yoga or Sahaja Yoga.
In Vihangam Yoga the mind is lifted to its source, the Akshara Brahma where it is permanently quietened, just like a river losing its identity in the ocean. Once the soul is freed from bondage of the mind, it realises its true nature and stops identifying itself with the human body. In fact, the soul then acts as the master and guides the mind and the body in the way it likes. Having realised the futility of worldly pleasures, derived through the sense organs and their objects, it soars higher in search of the Absolute Bliss (Paramananda). It is then only that the real meditation of Vihangam Yoga starts, terminating in Samādhi, the ultimate aim of Yoga of meeting with the Supreme Soul. In this state the soul has attained liberation while residing in the body itself (Jivanmukti).
The literal meaning of the word 'Yoga' is union. Vihangam Yoga is defined as the union of Atma with Paramatma. This union is achieved after Atma frees itself from the shackles of the mind and intellect and attains its pure conscious state. The Supreme Soul is a purely conscious entity and is beyond the reach of the mind and intellect. The mind and intellect are inert by themselves and are activated by the consciousness of the soul. An inert object cannot reach a conscious entity, far less unite with or merge in it. Therefore, the physical yogas cannot reach the ideal of Vihangam Yoga.
This yoga was also taught to Arjuna by the Lord Krishna In the celebrated Hindu Scripture Bhagwad Gita during the Mahabharata period, some five thousand years ago. This has called Brahma Vidya in the Gita and the Upanishads.
The divine knowledge of Vihangam Yoga disappeared gradually after the Mahabharata period. It was revived by the real mystic saint, Kabir, more than five hundred years ago.[attribution needed]

In recent times it was rediscovered by the great Swami Sadafal Deoji Maharaj of village Pakari of Ballia District of Indian state Uttar Pradesh (U.P.).The entire knowledge that he gained in the state, of Samadhi of Vihangam Yoga has been described fully and systematically by him in his unique spiritual work SWARVEDA, a book of couplets describing all aspects of spiritual practice in simple language. A detailed commentary has been written by his successor and son, Acharya Dharam Chandra Deoji Maharaj, and had been published from Adhyatmic Yantralaya, Garhwar; District Ballia, U.P.
The Vihangam yogis of today are verifying the experiences described therein just in the same way as was done during the Vedic period.
Modern science believes in objects perceived by sense organs with or without the help of various gadgets. Human sense organs are bound by severe limitations. The eyes and ears can see and hear only within a limited spectrum. Scientists discovered, an eagle's eye or a dog's ears can see or hear beyond human capabilities (ref. Eagle eye and Hearing range). This holds good for other sense organs like those of smell, taste or touch. With the help instruments, which are being invented from time to time, man has been able to extend his perception beyond natural human mind and intellect have also made deductions from certain phenomena occurring in the world. This has led to formulation of many hypotheses from time to time. These hypotheses have been changing since the dawn of civilization and will keep on changing till man is able to realize the truth. The modern scientists have observed that the universe is continuously expanding and this expansion is thought to be due to the process of creation of the universe. The scientists say that the universe will ultimately cease to expand and then the gravitational force will play its role to reduce it again to a cosmic egg (The Theory of Big Bang).
The scientists have put forward the theory of oscillating universe, which states that the cycles of creation and, dissolution will continue endlessly, a well-known Indian concept. What they call 'Cosmic egg' has been termed by the ancient Indian seers as Mool Prakriti, which is said to be composed of three basic substances, viz. Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas. These three substances combine in different proportions during creation giving rise to a variety of physical objects. This is analogous to the scientific knowledge that the atoms, which the physical objects are composed of, consist of three fundamental particles known as electrons, protons and neutrons and atoms of one object differ from those of the other only in the number and combination of these fundamental particles.

According to modern science the basic forces are four, viz. gravitational, electromagnetic and the strong nuclear force and weak nuclear force, which influence motion in particles and bodies and determine the interrelation among them. What is the origin of these forces? What is that which causes explosion in the cosmic egg? Is there a ruling power, which regulates the movement of stars and the galaxies in this universe whose vastness could be imagined by the presumption (based on no evidence at all) that there are galaxies so far away that light, traveling at the speed of three hundred thousand kilometers per second, has not yet reached our earth? The scientific method shows the most promise for finding answers to these questions; certainly more so than ancient fantasy-based mysticism.[citation needed]

Our sages of vote have discovered answers to these queries. The technique they employed was basically different from that used by the scientists, and therefore more a development of philosophy than a description of physical reality. Unlike the scientists, they neither attempted to develop equipment to bring the universe within the perceiving powers of their sense organs, nor did they invent super computers powerful enough to aid their mental faculties. On the contrary, the ancient spiritualists, rejecting investigation into how the universe actually works, mastered a technique of withdrawing the flow of consciousness from the senses, mind, and intellect and thus, supposedly, realized "the pure conscious form of their real selves". The pure conscious form of an individual is called Atma or the Self, and the state in which it that the Atma(soul) is realized is called Samadhi(deep meditation) . They discovered that Atma when freed from the bondage of body and mind has great potential power much beyond the concept of modern science. The knowledge gained after dissociating the conscious self from the phenomenal world in the state of Samadhi was verified over and over again for a long span of time by a number of great seers, called Rishis. They handed down their observations to their followers, generation after generation. These observations are codified in the four Vedas and they have not been improved upon or falsified by modern scientists. In fact, the more the science progresses, the more does it come nearer to the recordings in the Vedas.[not specific enough to verify]

The Vedic Rishis experienced during their Samadhi, a primordial Being, supremely conscious and superbly blissful. It is called Parama Akshara, Parama Brahma or Paramatma. When the Atma unites itself with the Paramatma, it is able to imbibe the qualities of Paramatma. An iron ball put in the fire of a furnace becomes a glowing red mass of fire itself. Similarly, when the finitely conscious Atma merges with the infinitely conscious Paramatma, it becomes an all-knowing entity and thus acquires the complete knowledge of the entire existence.[citation needed]

The technique of achieving the union of Atma and Paramatma is called Yoga in the Vedic sense of the term (yoga literally means union). To distinguish it from various prevalent physical, mental and spiritual practices, which also go by the name of Yoga, the Vedic yoga is called Vihangam Yoga or Sahaja Yoga. It was this yoga that Lord Krishna taught to Arjuna In the celebrated work Bhagwad Gita during the Mahabharata period, some five thousand years ago. This has called Brahma Vidya in the Gita and the Upanishads. The divine knowledge of Vihangam Yoga disappeared gradually after the Mahabharata period. The real mystic saint, Kabir, revived it more than five hundred years ago. In recent times the great Swami Sadafal Deoji Maharaj of village Pakari of Ballia District of U.P rediscovered it. The entire knowledge that he gained in the state, of Samadhi of Vihangam Yoga has been described fully and systematically by him in his unique spiritual work SWARVEDA, a book of couplets describing all aspects of spiritual practice in simple language. A detailed commentary has been written by his successor and son, Acharya Dharam Chandra Deoji Maharaj, and had been published from Adhyatmic Yantralaya, Garhwar; District Ballia, U.P. The Vihangam yogis of today are verifying the experiences described therein just in the same way as was done during the Vedic period.