A binding neuron (BN) is an abstract mathematical model of the electrical activity of a neuron, closely related to well-known integrate-and-fire model. The BN model originated in a 1998 paper by A. K. Vidybida.
"Although a neuron requires energy, its main function is to receive signals and to send them out that is, to handle information." --- this words by Francis Crick point at the necessity to describe neuronal functioning in terms of processing of abstract signals [2] The two abstract concepts, namely, the "coincidence detector" and "temporal integrator" are offered in this course,[3] .[4] The first one expects that a neuron fires a spike if a number of input impulses are received at the same time. In the temporal integrator concept a neuron fires a spike after receiving a number of input impulses distributed in time. Each of the two takes into account some features of real neurons since it is known that a realistic neuron can display both coincidence detector and temporal integrator modes of activity depending on the stimulation applied, .[5] At the same time, it is known that a neuron together with excitatory impulses receives also inhibitory stimulation. A natural development of the two above mentioned concepts could be a concept which endows inhibition with its own signal processing role.

In the neuroscience, there is an idea of binding problem. For example, during visual perception, such features as form, color and stereopsis are represented in the brain by different neuronal assemblies. The mechanism ensuring those features to be perceived as belonging to a single real object is called "feature binding", .[6] The experimentally approved opinion is that precise temporal coordination between neuronal impulses is required for the binding to occur.This coordination mainly means that signals about different features must arrive to certain areas in the brain within a certain time window.

The BN concept reproduces at the level of single generic neuron the requirement, which is necessary for the feature binding to occur, and which was formulated earlier at the level of large-scale neuronal assemblies. Its formulation is made possible by the analysis of response of the Hodgkin–Huxley model to stimuli similar to those the real neurons receive in the natural conditions, see "Mathematical implementations", below.
Leaky integrate and fire neuron is a widely used abstract neuronal model. If to state a similar problem for the LIF neuron with appropriately chosen inhibition mechanism, then it is possible to obtain step-like dependencies similar to the Fig. 1 as well. Therefore, the LIF neuron as well can be considered as mathematical model of the BN concept.
The binding neuron model implements the BN concept in the most refined form. In this model each input impulse is stored in the neuron during fixed time 
τ\tau and then disappears. This kind of memory serves as surrogate of the excitatory postsynaptic potential. 
In the BN model, it is necessary to control the time to live of any stored impulse during calculation of the neuron's response to input stimulation. This makes the BN model more complicated for numerical simulation than the LIF model. On the other hand, any impulse spends finite time 
τ\tau  in the BN model neuron. This is in contrast to the LIF model, where traces of any impulse can be present infinitely long. This property of the BN model allows to get precise description of output activity of BN stimulated with random stream of input impulses, see [14] [15] .[16]

The limiting case of BN with infinite memory, τ→∞, corresponds to the temporal integrator. The limiting case of BN with infinitely short memory, τ→0, corresponds to the coincidence detector.